Let me begin with my fondest memory of Aaron. Not  too far back in the school days, aaron was when he was shorter than me. Those were truly good days. If we ever dared make fun of his height though, he retaliated with “Good things come in small packages”. (a quote, many of our short brethren borrowed) Then the unthinkable happens, out of the blue, aaron shoots up, and grew tall to become the complan boy that nobody imagined he could ever be. This detail is incredibly important in his life because it’s pretty much the first and last time, nature or even luck was completely on aaron’s side.

So the first question I asked myself when preparing this speech was what was the fundamental moment that sparked our deep (so deep) friendship. After hours of tapasya I had an answer.

This goes all the way back to the 7th Standard - I didn’t know him too well, but I made the mistake of messing with him. I had a tiny tiff with him in school, about notes. Exactly, 2 days later, after the fight,  on the 2nd field of St. Edmund’s school Shillong, our PTE teacher (who was also named Edmund) consulted this now handsome groom on who should be in the cricket team. I walked up to him and asked him to write my name. He looks behind my shoulder, ignores my very existence - and does not shortlist me. That is the day I decided to align myself strongly to the saying “Keep your friends close and your enemies closer”. Since I’m here at the wedding, you can see I’m still doing a good job for over a decade now. But don’t think that aaron didn’t try to pull a fast one off after that. Years later he said he wanted to replace me in counter strike matches for the PCN tournament --- I refused categorically :) (the undercover friendship strategy really worked) of course we went on to give a humiliating defeat to the then “proclaimed” best counter strike team of shillong. So in hindsight I was the best choice for both the teams ;), ofcourse :D

Talking about first impressions, The question here however was, why was aaron suddenly in charge for selecting the team? He would constantly find himself in these positions as decision makers for teachers and quickly earned the tag of “teacher’s pet”, “yeh to beta bohot chalu hai” and several other terms among the jealous few. He also mingled with too many people and made several friend groups which he divided his time amongst. He spent time learning different plethora of skills. This earned him the title of Mr. Popular and also “Jack of all trades and master of None”.

Fast forward 14 years ahead. Today the decision makers are looking up to him to make the calls. He is often in charge, and where he is not then he’s definitely the right hand behind the shadows that makes everything work (spoiler alert: this wedding is a perfect example, You guys think we are amazing organizers? We were furnished detailed excel sheets with formulas for this job). 

In 7th standard Aaron helped me make and distribute our first website, which we called Ankron Technologies (notice the innovative mash up of our names). Would you believe it? Internet wasn’t great back then so we distributed this in 1.44 Mb Floppy disks. 15 years later we founded our own software company, and he sat beside me in the capacity of a director/CEO of bansara and actually wrote javascript code with me. Ladies and gentlemen, you are looking at a Jack of all trades, but a master of so many, it will blow your mind! Anybody who has worked with him, will know this for a fact.

Today you will constantly find yourself asking the question “Where’s aaron”. And when this happens you can rest assured that 1 of the 2 following things has happened:
He spent an intense and intimate time with you, making you feel so much better and then just disappearing. You are left wanting for more. The truth is he has now left to do the same with other people that matter in his life, be it family, friends, a guest that needs tending or even a stranger that asks for his help.
The other time you will find yourself asking this question, is literally the situation “when in doubt, just ask aaron”. A tiny shred of uncertainty creeps into your life and you will find yourself seeking the counsel of the great messiah Aaron Basiawmoit. This is the kind of trust and respect he commands.

Mind you folks, all this was not talent, but a lot of passion, obsession and quest for self discovery that got him here. And the road wasn’t easy, don’t worry he will tell you about it. Aaron I have been there for you for quite a few of your hard times. But perhaps, you have been there for me more. Not counting the times, I failed miserably to be there for you, but you never really let me know.

The truth is, Aaron, I know very less about your worries today than I ever had. You have moulded yourself to be an incredibly strong person, transformed yourself in such a way, its surreal to see you grow so much, practically capable of handling whatever this universe throws at you without exposing your pain and vulnerabilities to this world, with of course the occasional slip ups  ---- and for every shadow that you cast and are unwary of, Roshna shines a light to reveal to you things you could never see ---- How do I know that you guys ask? What was once a conversation starting with “Ankan, I don’t know what to do” slowly became at every moment in your life -- “Ankan, do you know what Roshna made me realize today?”. This coming from a person who I have already considered to have grown so much, only shows how amazing Roshna is.

This is the point in time for me where Roshna’s story truly begins, because I did not have the privilege to spend a childhood with you Roshna, I see you with the eyes of Aaron. However, I won’t lie here today. I did have ample amount of time to be your friend, to be by your side but I didn’t. I wanted to, but I miserably failed. This I will always regret, but some lessons in life are simply learnt that way. You both have been very nice and at the same time unfair to me for not pointing out to me the times I miserably failed to be your friend. Know this Roshna, I truly do love you, but i am quite stupid.

Aaron, Roshna, what truly scares me that today, that my only job here was to show up, because you both are so rock solid, you sure as hell don’t need my help. That’s true. I don’t have any moments shared with you both that altered your lives. You both did it on your own, and you deserve that credit more than anyone else.

For those who are listening to me today, know that if your best friend is so well moulded with the love of his life in infinite strength, that your only job is to show up at their wedding, you know for a fact that he is with the best person he could ever be with.

We stand here, on this enchanted Garden today, to mark the end of an almost decade long struggle riddled with doubt, darkness, love, hate, tears, violence (I can tell you first hand that some chappals were thrown) and not to mention interference all through which you moulded each other and levelled up together in this war.  

Remember the “where’s aaron” moment we all have experienced? It had a new answer - He’s with Roshna - in however possible way he could be, phone, messages, skype, missed calls, or staring at the moon at the same time. You cannot imagine the number of cakes and candles that these 2 have blown out over the phone or using the internet. It never came easy. They are not a match made in heaven, but charcoal chiseled together forged into a single diamond. This took immense patience and work, something very few of us can relate to.

Today, however Roshna, you are not a warrior, I saw you an excited and frolicking bride, blushing and looking beautiful in her lace gown, donning a french manicure and gorgeous wedding ring. I hope it’s everything and more than what you would have imagined as a child. My heart sunk to my stomach the moment I saw you. As Nawal put it, you truly are the most beautiful person in the universe at this moment.

Last but not least, The unsung heroes of this celebration are the parents. Uncle, Aunty, No matter what they told you to convince you that this marriage is a good idea, it took a lot of trust and patience for you to do this. Ladies and gentlemen, it is not easy to be parents in todays time :) “uncle, aunty, thank you for trusting them” - in nepali