Like most children, I had an insatiable curiosity. I had to know how things worked and understand why things were they way they were. This often meant pestering my parents with endless questions, or breaking things to see what they looked like inside. This caused unforeseen problems involving a favorite clock, a TV, and our pet hamster Lily.

In college, I fell in love with the idea of travelling the world to discover forgotten approaches to current challenges in wellness and sustainable agriculture. I felt there must be things our ancient ancestors knew that we could apply today. I just needed a way to fund my exploration and commercialization of these lost secrets. 

Well that didn’t happen. It turns out such funders are in short supply. But I did land a job with a travel company that booked tours all over the world for people who wanted to experience new cultures and broaden their perspectives. One of our challenges was that the two large market segments that are particularly interested in this type of travel are people in their 20’s and retirees. The retiree segment is profitable but very competitive. The 20’s segment is not as competitive (or profitable) because most of these travellers are frugal and don’t take extended trips.

I was assigned to increase our business in the 20’s segment. As I was noodling this problem one day and surfing the web for insights, I stumbled upon a site called Atlas Obscura. I was enthralled. They claim to be the “definitive guide to the world's wondrous and curious places.” But what really captured my attention, was their proclamation that “around the corner is something that will surprise the hell out of you.” Interesting.

For my target segment (the 20’s), who have the desire but neither the time nor money to travel the far-flung reaches of the planet, this might be the ticket. We could sell short tours to nearby (but unknown and fascinating) places that satisfied their desire and meet their time and budget constraints. Bingo! Our three-day weekend “Wonder and Curiosity” tours are now our most popular tour category.

Atlas Obscura is my favorite website because it inspires me to explore widely while appreciating what is nearby. One of the things that attracted me to this opportunity with your company is your reputation for developing innovative products by challenging traditional orthodoxy. Maybe there is something we can learn from the Atlas Obscura community and apply to your next wellness product development effort.

