I thought I knew a fair amount about NextTrend, because I went to college a few miles from your headquarters and several of my classmates’ friends worked for your company. But a cursory review of your website made it clear that my understanding was superficial.

I really wanted to understand what made you different from your competitors and why your clients chose to do business with you. So I broadened and deepened my research. I studied your financial statements and annual reports. I read your press releases and the articles written about NextTrend. I reviewed LinkedIn bios of your executives and board members. I watched videos of presentations your staff made at trade conferences and checked out your list of strategic partners.

Then I went deeper still. Because I realized that I didn’t understand your industry well enough to evaluate the competitive landscape and the forces shaping future success. I wanted to know who the best players were, the solid performers, the innovators, and the strugglers. I had learned a lot by reading and watching presentations but I felt I was missing something. It was time to talk to people in the business.

I used school contacts, LinkedIn, family and friends, and anybody else I could cajole to set up informational calls and meetings with people at NextTrend and other companies in your industry. Fortunately, many people were generous with their time and I was able to hear directly from people in the business about what it’s like to work in the industry and the characteristics and culture of various companies.

What I learned about NextTrend frankly blew me away. I had no idea how passionate your people are about their work and their colleagues. Or how entrepreneurial your culture is. I didn’t know about your proprietary TrendMaster algorithms—so cool! And I had the completely wrong impression about the basis for your expansion into South America.

I obviously don’t know everything about NextTrend. And I’m eager to learn more. But what I have discovered through this research process has made me tremendously excited about working for you.