FIRST YEAR 

July 12, 19 . . . Hella and I are writing a diary. 
We both agreed that when we went to the high school 
we would write a diary every day. Dora keeps a 
diary too, but she gets furious if I look at it. I call 
Helene "Hella," and she calls me "Rita;" Helene and 
Crete are so vulgar. Dora has taken to calling herself 
"Thea," but I go on calling her "Dora." She says 
that little children (she means me and Hella) ought 
not to keep a diary. She says they will write such a 
lot of nonsense. No more than in hers and Lizzi's. 

July 13th. Really we were not to begin writing 
imtil after the holidays, but since we are both going 
away, we are beginning now. Then we shall know 
what we have been doing in the holidays. 

The day before yesterday we had an entrance 
examination, it was very easy, in dictation I made 
only 1 mistake — writing ihn without h. The mistress 
said that didn't matter, I had only made a slip. That 
is quite true, for I know well enough that ihn has 
an A in it. We were both dressed in white with rose- 
coloured ribbons, and everyone believed we were 
sisters or at Jeast cousins. It would be very nice to 
have a cousin. But it's still nicer to have a friend, 
for we can tell one another everything. 

July 14th. The mistress was very kind. Because 

of her Hella and I are really sorry that we are not 

going to a middle school. Then every day before 

lessons began we could have had a talk with her in 

the class-room. But we're awfully pleased because 

11 



12 A YOUNG GIRL'S DIARY 

of the other girls. One is more important when one 
goes to the high school instead of only to the middle 
school. That is why the girls are in such a rage. 
"They are bursting with pride" (that's what my 
sister says of me and Hella, but it is not true). "Our 
two students" said the mistress when we came away. 
She told us to write to her from the country. I shall. 

July 15th. Lizziy Hella's sister, is not so horrid 
as Dora, she is always so nice I To-day she gave 
each of us at least ten chocolate-creams. It's true 
Hella often says to me: "You don't know her, what 
a beast she can be. Your sister is generally very 
nice to me.'' Certainly it is very funny the way in 
which she always speaks of us as "the little ones" 
or "the children," as if she had never been a child 
herself, and indeed a much littler one than we are. 
Besides we're just the same as she is now. She is in 
the fourth class and we are in the first. 

To-morrow we are going to Kaltenbach in Tyrol. 
I'm frightfully excited. Hella went away to-day to 
Hungary to her unde and aunt with her mother and 
Lizzi. Her father is at manoeuvres. 

July 19th. It's awfully hard to write every day 
in the holidays. Everything is so new and one has 
no time to write. We are living in a big house in 
the forest Dora bagged the front veranda straight 
off for her own writing. At the back of the house 
there are such swarms of horrid little flies; every- 
thing is black with flies. I do hate flies and such 
things. I'm not going to put up with being driven 
out of the front veranda. I won't have it. Besides, 
Father said: "Don't quarrel, children I" (Children 
to her too ! I ) He's quite right. She puts on such 
airs because she'll be fourteen in October. "The 
verandas are common property," said Father. 



FIRST YEAR 13 

Father's always so just He never xets Dora lord 
it over me, but Mother often makes a favourite of 
Dora. I'm writing to Hella to-day. She's not written 
to me yet. 

July 21st. Hella has written to me, 4 pages, and 
such a jolly letter. I don't know what I should do 
without herl Perhaps she will come here in August 
or perhaps I shall go to stay with her. I think I 
would rather go to stay with her. I like paying long 
visits. Father said: ''We'll see/' and that means 
hell let me go. When Father and Mother say We'll 
see it really means Yes; but they won't say "yes" 
so that if it does not come ofF one can't say that they 
haven't kept their word. Father really lets me do 
anything I like, but not Mother. Still, if I practise 
my piano regularly perhaps she'll let me go. I must 
go for a walk. 

July 22nd. Hella wrote that I positively must 
write every day, for one must keep a promise and we 
swore to write every day. I. . . . 

July 23rd. It's awful. One has no time. Yester- 
day when I wanted to write the rocnn had to be cleaned 
and D. was in the arbour. Before that I had not 
written a single word and in the front veranda all 
my pages blew away. We write on loose pages. Hella 
thinks it's better because then one does not have to 
tear anything out. But we have promised one another 
to throw nothing away and not to tear anything up. 
Why should we? One can tell a friend everything. 
A pretty friend if one couldn't. Yesterday when I 
wanted to go into the arbour Dora glared at me 
savagely, saying What do you want? As if the 
arbour belonged to her, just as she wanted to bag 
the front veranda all for herself. She's too sickening. 

Yesterday afternoon we were on the Eolber-Ei^d. 



14 A YOUNG GIRL'S DIARY 

It was lovely. Father was awfully jolly and we 
pelted one another with pine-cones. It was jolly. 
I threw one at Dora and it hit her on her padded bust. 
She let out such a yell and I said out loud You couldn't 
feel it there. As she went by she said Pig I It doesn't 
matter, for I know she understood me and that what 
I said was true. I should like to know what she 
writes about every day to Erika and what she writes 
in her diary. Mother was out of sorts and stayed at 
home. 

July 24th. To-day is Sunday. I do love Sundays. 
Father says: You children have Sundays every day. 
That's quite true in the holidays, but not at other 
times. The peasants and their wives and children 
are all very gay, wearing Tyrolese dresses, just like 
those I have seen in the theatre. We are wearing 
our white dresses to-day, and I have made a great 
cherr3rstain upon mine, not on purpose, but because 
I sat down upon some fallen cherries. So this after- 
noon when we go out walking I must wear my pink 
dress. All the better, for I don't care to be dressed 
exactly the same as Dora. I don't see why everyone 
should know that we are sisters. Let people think we 
are cousins. She does not like it either; I wish I 
knew why. 

Oswald is coming in a week, and I am awfully ' 
pleased. He is older than Dora, but I can always get 
on with him. Hella writes that she finds it dull with- 
out me; so do I. 

July 25th. I wrote to Fraulein Priickl to-day. 
She is staying at Achensee. I should like to see her. 
Every afternoon we bathe and then go for a walk. 
But to-day it has been raining all day. Such a bore. 
I forgot to bring my paint-box and I'm not allowed 
to read all day. Mother says, if you gobble all your 



FIRST YEAR IS 

books up now you'll have nothing left to read. That's 
quite true, but I can't even go and swing. 

Afternoon. I must write some more. I've had a 
frightful row with Dora. She says I've been fiddling 
with her things. It's all because she's so imtidy. 
As if her things could interest me. Yesterday she 
left her letter to Erika lying about on the table, and 
all I read was: He's as handsome as a Greek god. 
I don't know who ^'he" was for she came in at that 
moment. It's probably Erail Rudi, with whom she 
is everlastingly playing tennis and carries on like 
anything. As for handsome — well, there's no ac- 
counting for tastes. 

July 26th. It's a good thing I brought my dolls' 
portmanteau. Mother said: You'll be glad to have 
it on rainy days. Of course I'm much too old to play 
with dolls, but even though I'm 111 can make dolls' 
clothes still. One learns something while one is doing 
it, and when I've finished something I do enjoy it so. 
Mother cut me out some things and I was tacking 
them together. Then Dora came into the room and 
said Hullo, the child is sewing things for her dolls. 
What cheek, as if she had never played with dolls. 
Besides, I don't really play with dolls any longer. 
When she sat down beside me I sewed so vigorously 
that I made a great scratch on her hand, and said: 
Oh, I'm so sorry, but you came too dose. I hope 
shell know why I really did it. Of course she'll 
go and sneak to Mother. Let her. What right has 
she to call me child. She's got a fine red scratch any- 
how, and on her right hand where everyone can see. 

July 27 th. There's such a lot of fruit here. I 
eat raspberries and gooseberries all day and Mother 
says that is why I have no appetite for dinner. But 
Dr. Klein always says Fruit is so wholesome. But 



r 

 



16 A YOUNG GIRL'S DIARY 



why should it be unwholesome all at once? Hella 
always says that when one likes anything awfully 
much one is always scolded about it until one gets 
perfectly sick of it. Hella often gets in such a temper 
with her mother » and then her mother says: We 
make such sacrifices for our children and they reward 
us with ingratitude. I should like to know what 
sacrifices they make. I think it's the children who 
make the sacrifices. When I want to eat gooseberries 
and am not allowed to, the sacrifice is mine not 
Mother^s. I've written all this to Hella. FriLulein 
Priickl has written to me. The address on her letter 
to me was splendid^ 'Traulein Grete Lainer, Lyzeal- 
schiilerin." Of course Dora had to know better than 
anyone else, and said that in the higher classes from 
the fourth upwards (because she is in the fourth) 
they write "Lyzeistin." She said: "Anyhow, in the 
holidays, before a girl has attended the first class 
she's not a Lyzealschiilerin at all." Then Father 
chipped in, saying that we (I didn't begin it) really 
must stop this eternal wrangling; he really could 
not stand it. He's quite right, but what he said 
won't do any good, for Dora will go on just the same. 
Fnlulein Priickl wrote that she was ddigkted that I 
had written. As soon as I have time she wants me 
to write to her again. Great Scott, I've always time 
for her. I shall write to her again this evening after 
supper, so as not to keep her waiting. 

July 29th. I simply could not write yesterday. 
The Warths have arrived, and I had to spend the 
whole day with Ema and Liesel, although it rained 
all day. We had a ripping time. They know a lot 
of round games and we played for sweets. I won 
47, and I gave five of them to Dora. Robert is already 
more than a head taller than we are, I mean than 



FIRST YEAR 17 

Liesel and me; I think he is fifteen. He says Fr^^ulein 
Crete and carried my doak which Mother sent me be- 
cause of the rain and he saw me home after supper. 

To-morrow is my birthday and everyone has been 
invited and Mother has made strawberry cream and 
wafiSes. How spif&ng. 

July 30th. To-day is my birthday. Father gave 
me a splendid parasol with a flowered border and 
painting materials and Mother gave me a huge post- 
card album for 800 cards and stories for school girls, 
and Dora gave me a beautiful box of notepaper and 
Mother had made a chocolate-cream cake for dinner 
to-day as well as the strawberry cream. The first 
thing in the morning the Warths sent me three birth- 
day cards. And Robert had written on his: With 
deepest respect your faithful R. It is glorious to have 
a birthday, everyone is so kind, even Dora. Oswald 
sent me a wooden paper-knife, the handle is a dragon 
and the blade shoots out of its mouth instead of flame ; 
or perhaps the blade is its tongue, one can't be quite 
sure. It has not rained yet on my birthday. Father 
says I was bom under a lucky star. That suits me 
all right, tip top. 

July 31st. Yesterday was heavenly. We laughed 
till our sides ached over Consequences. I was always 
being coupled with Robert and oh the things we did 
together, not really of course but only in writing: 
kissed, hugged, lost in the forest, batibed together; 
but I say, I wouldn't do that! quarrelled. That 
won't happen, it's quite impossible! Then we drank 
my health clinking glasses five times and Robert 
wanted to drink it in wine but Dora said that would 
never do! The real trouble was this. She always 
gets furious if she has to play second fiddle to me 
and yesterday I was certaiidy first fiddle. 



18 A YOUNG GIRL'S DIARY 

Now I must write a word about to-day. WeVe 
had a splendid time. We were in Tief engraben with 
the Warths where there are such a lot of wild straw- 
berries. Robert picked all the best of them for me, 
to the great annoyance of Dora who had to pick 
them for herself. Really I would rather pick them for 
myself, but when some one else picks them for one 
for lave (that's what Robert said) then one is quite 
glad to have them picked for one. Besides, I did 
pick some myself and gave most of them to Father 
and some to Mother. At afternoon tea which we 
had in Flischberg I had to sit beside Ema instead 
of Robert. Ema is rather dull. Mother says she is 
anemic; that sounds frightfully interesting, but I 
don't quite know what it means. Dora is always 
saying that she is anemic, but of course that is not 
true. And Father always says "Don't talk such stuff, 
you're as fit as a fiddle." That puts her in such a 
wax. Last year Lizzi was really anemic, so the doctor 
said, she was always having palpitation and had to 
take iron and drink Burgxmdy. I think that's where 
Dora got the idea. 

August 1st Hella is rather cross with me because 
I wrote and told her that I had spent the whole day 
with the W's. Still, she is really my only friend or 
I should not have written and told her. Every year 
in the country she has another friend too, but that 
doesn't put me out. I can't understand why she 
doesn't like Robert; she doesn't know anything about 
him except what I have written and certainly that 
was nothing but good. Of course she does know him 
for he is a cousin of the Semigs and she met him once 
there. But one does not get to know a person from 
seeing them once. Anyhow she does not know him 
the way I do. Yesterday I was with the Warths 



FIRST YEAR 19 

all day. We played Place for the King and Robert 
caught me and I had to give him a kiss. And Ema 
said, that doesn't count, for I had let myself be caught. 
But Robert got savage and said: Ema is a perfect 
nuisance, she spoils everyone's pleasure. He's quite 
right, but there's some one else just as bad. But I 
do hope Ema has not told Dora about the kiss. If 
she has everyone will know and I shouldn't like that. 
I lay in wait for Ema with the sweets which Aunt 
Dora sent us. Robert and Liesel and I ate the rest. 
They were so good and nearly all large ones. At 
first Robert wanted to take quite a little one, but 
I said he must only have a big one. After that he 
always picked out tiie big ones. When I came home 
in the evening with the empty box Father laughed 
and said: There's nothing mean about our Gretel. 
Besides, Mother still has a great box full ; I have no 
idea whether Dora still has a lot, but I expect so. 

August 2nd. Oswald arrived this afternoon at 
5. He's a great swell now; he's begun to grow a 
moustache. In the evening Father took him to the 
hotel to introduce him to some friends. He said it 
would be an awful bore, but he will certainly make 
a good impression especially in his new tourist get- 
up and leather breeches. Grandmama and Grandpapa 
sent love to all. I've never seen them. They have 
sent a lot of cakes and sweets and Oswald grumbled 
no end because he had to bring them. Oswald is 
always smoking cigarettes and Father said to him: 
Come along old chap, we'll go to the inn and have a 
drink on the strengdi of your good report. It seems 
to me rather fimny; no one wants to drink anything 
when Dora and I have a good report, at most they 
give us a present. Oswald has only Twos and Threes 
and very few Ones and in Greek nothing but Satis- 



20 A YOUNG GIRL'S DIARY 

factory, but I have nothing but Ones. He said some- 
thing to Father in Latin and Father laughed heartily 
and said something I could not understand. I don't 
think it was Latin, but it may have been Magyar or 
English. Father knows nearly all languages, even 
Czech, but thank goodness he doesn't talk them unless 
he wants to tease us. Like that time at the station 
when Dora and I were so ashamed. Czech is horrid. 
Mother says so too. When Robert pretends to speak 
Czech it's screamingly funny. 

August 3rd. I got a chill bathing the other day 
so now I am not allowed to bathe for a few days. 
Robert keeps me company. We are quite alone and 
he tells me all sorts of tales. He swings me so high 
that I positively yell. To-day he made me really 
&^Si7» ioT he said: Oswald is a regular noodle. I 
said, that's not true, boys can never stand one an- 
other. Besides, it is not true that he lisps. Anyhow I 
like Oswald much better than Dora who always says 
''the children" when she is talking of me and of Hella 
and even of Robert. Then he said : Dora is just as 
big a goose as Ema. He's quite right there. Robert 
says he is never going to smoke, that it is so vulgar, 
that real gentlemen never smoke. But what about 
Father, I should like to know? He says, too, that he 
will never grow a beard but will shave every day and 
his wife will have to put everything straight to him. 
But a beard suits Father and I can't imagine him 
without a beard. I know I won't marry a man with* 
out a beard. 

August 5th. We go to the tennis ground every 
day. When we set off yesterday, Robert and I and 
Liesel and Ema and Ren£, Dora called after us: 
The bridal pair in spee. She had picked up the 
phrase from Oswald. I think it means in a hundred 



^ FIRST YEAR 21 

years. Sht can wait a hundred years if she likes, we 
shan't. Mother scolded her like anything and said 
she mustn't say such stupid things. A good job too; 
in spee, in spee. Now we always talk of her as Inspee, 
but no one knows who we mean. 

August 6th. Hella can't come here, for she is going 
to Klausenburg with her mother to stay with her 
other unde who is district judge there or whatever 
they call a district judge in Hungary. Whenever I 
think of a district judge I think of District Judge T.» 
such a hideous man. What a nose and his wife is so 
lovely; but her parents forced her into the marriage. 
I would not let anyone force me into such a marriage, 
I would much sooner not marry at all, besides she's 
awfully unhappy. 

August 7th. There has been such a fearful row 
about Dora. Oswald told Father that she flirted 
so at the tennis court and he could not stand it. 
Father was in a towering rage and now we mayn't 
play tennis any more. What upset her more dian 
anything was that Father said in front of me: This 
litde chit of 14 is already encouraging people to make 
love to her. Her eyes were quite red and swollen 
and she couldn't eat anything at supper because she 
had such a headache! ! We know all about her head- 
aches. But I really can't see why I shouldn't go and 
play tennis. 

August 8th. Oswald says that it wasn't the 
student's fault at all but only Dora's. I can quite 
believe that when I think of that time on the Southern 
Railway. Still, they wont let me play tennis any 
more, diough I begged and begged Mother to ask 
Father to let me. She said it would do no good for 
Father was very angry and I mustn't spend whole 
days with the Warths any more. Whole daysl I 
should like to know when I was a whole day there. 



22 A YOUNG GIRL'S DIARY 

When I went there naturally I had to stay to dinner 
at least. What have I got to do with Dora's love 
affairs? It's really too absurd. But grown-ups are 
always like that. When one person has done any- 
thing the others have to pay for it too. 

August 9th. Thank goodness, I can play tennis 
once more; I begged and begged until Father let me 
go. Dora declares that nothing will induce her to ask ! 
That's the old story of the fox and the grapes. She 
has been pla3dng the invalid lately, won't bathe, and 
stays at home when she can instead of going for 
walks. I should like to know what's the matter with 
her. What I can't make out is why Father lets her 
do it. As for Mother, she always spoils Dora; Dora 
is Mother's favourite, especially when Oswald is not 
on hand. I can understand her making a favourite 
of Oswald, but not of Dora. Father always says 
that parents have no favourites, but treat all their 
children alike. That's true enough as far as Father 
is concerned, although Dora declares that Father 
makes a favourite of me; but that's only her fancy. 
At Christmas and other times we always get the same 
sort of presents, and that's the real test. Rosa Plank 
always gets at least three times as mudi as the rest 
of the family, that's what it is to be a favourite. 

August 12th. I can't write every day for I spend 
most of my time with the Warths. Oswald can't 
stand Robert, he says he is a cad and a greenhorn. 
What vulgar phrases. For three daj^ I haven't 
spoken to Oswald except when I really had to. When 
I told £ma and Liesel about it, they said that brothers 
were always rude to their sisters. I said, I should 
like to know why. Besides, Robert is generally very 
nice to his sisters. They said. Yes before you, because 
he's on his best behaviour with you. Yesterday we 



FIRST YEAR 23 

laughed like anything when he told us what fun the 
bo]rs make of their masters. That story about the 
cigarette ends was screamingly funny. They have a 
society called T. Au. M., that is in Latin Be Silent 
or Die in initial letters. No one may betray the so- 
ciety's secrets, and when they make a new member 
he has to strip off all his clothes and lie down naked 
and every one spits on his chest and rubs it and says: 
Be One of Us, but all in Latin. Then he has to go 
to the eldest and biggest who gives him two or three 
cuts with a cane and he has to swear that he will 
never betray anyone. Then everyone smokes a cigar 
and touches him with the lighted end on the arm 
or somewhere and says: Every act of treachery will 
bum you like that. And then the eldest, who has 
a special name which I can't remember, tattoos on 
him the word Taum, that is Be Silent or Die, and a 
heart with the name of a girl. Robert says that if 
he had known me sooner he would have diosen 
^'Gretchen." I asked him what name he had tattooed 
on him, but he said he was not allowed to tell. I 
shall tell Oswald to look when they are bathing and 
to tell me. In this society they abuse the masters 
frightfully and the one who thinks of the best tricks 
to play on them is elected to the Rohon; to be a 
Rohon is a great distinction and the others must al- 
ways carry out his orders. He said there was a lot 
more which he couldn't tell me because it's too 
tremendous. Then I had to swear that I would never 
tdl anyone about the society and he wanted me to take 
the oath upon my knees, but I wouldn't do that and 
he nearly forced me to my knees. In the end I had 
to give him my hand on it and a kiss. I didn't mind 
giving him that, for a kiss is nothing, but nothing 
would induce me to kneel down. Still, I was in an 



24 A YOUNG GIRL'S DIARY 

awful frighty for we were quite alone in the garden 
and he took me by the throat and tried to force me 
to my knees. All that about the society he told me 
when we were quite alone for he said: I can't have 
your name tattooed on me because it's against our 
laws to have two names but now that you have sworn 
I can let you know what I really am and think in 
secret. 

I couldn't sleep all night for I kept on dreaming 
of the society^ wondering whether there are such 
societies in the high school and whether Dora is in 
a society and has a name tattooed on her. But it 
would be horrible to have to strip naked before all 
one's schoolfellows. Perhaps in the societies of the 
high-school girls that part is left out. But I shouldn't 
like to say for sure whether I'd have Robert's name 
tattooed on me. 

August 1 5th. Yesterday Robert told me that there 
are some schoolboy societies where they do very im- 
proper things, but that never happened in their society. 
But he didn't say what. I said, the stripping naked 
seems to me awful; but he said, Oh, that's nothing, 
that must happen if we're to trust one another, it's 
all right as long as there's nothing improper. I wish 
I knew what. I wish I knew whether Oswald knows 
about it, and whether he is in such a society or in 
a proper one and whether Father was in one. If I 
could only find out. But I can't ask, for if I did 
I should betray Robert. When he sees me he always 
presses my left wrist without letting anyone see. He 
said that is the warning to me to be silent. But he 
needn't do that really, for I never would betray him 
whatever happened. He said: The pain is to bind 
you to me. When he says that his eyes grow dark, 
quite black, although his eyes are really grey and they 



FIRST YEAR 25 

get very large. Especially in the evening when we 
say goodbye, it frightens me. I'm always dreaming 
of him. 

August 18th. Yesterday evening we had illumina* 
tions in honour of the emperor's birthday. We didn't 
get home until half past twelve. At first we went 
to a concert in the park and to the illuminations. 
They fired salutes from the hills and there were bea- 
cons flaring on the hill-tops; it was rather creepy al- 
though it was wonderful. My teeth chattered once or 
twice, I don't know whether I was afraid something 
would happen or why it was. Then R. came and 
talked such a lot. He is set on going into the army. 
For that he needn't learn so much, and what he's learn- 
ing now is of no use to him. He says that doesn't 
matter, that knowledge will give him a great pull. I 
don't think he looks stupid, though Oswald says so to 
make me angry. All at once we found ourselves quite 
away from the others and so we sat on a bench to wait 
for ihem. Then I asked R. once more about the other 
societies, the ones in which they do such improper 
things. But he wouldn't tell me for he said he would 
not rob me of my innocence. I thought that very 
stupid, and I said that perhaps he didn't know himself 
and it was all put on. All that happened, he said, 
was that anyone who joined the society was tickled 
until he couldn't stand it any longer. And once one 
of them got St. Vitus's dance, that is frightful con- 
vulsions and they were afraid that everything would 
come out. And since then in their society no more 
tickling had been allowed. Shall I tickle you a little? 
I don't understand you, I said, and anyhow you 
daren't. 

He gave a great laugh and suddenly he seized me 
and tickled me under the arm. It made me want to 



26 A YOUNG GIRL'S DIARY 

laugh frightf ully, but I stifled it for there were still 
lots of people going by. So he gave that up and 
tickled my hand. I liked it at first, but then I got 
angry and dragged my hand away. Just then Inspee 
went by with two other girls and directly they had 
passed us we followed dose behind as if we had been 
walking like that all the time. It saved me a wigging 
from Mother, for she always wants us all to keep to- 
gether. As we went along R. said : Look out, Gretel, 
I^m going to tickle you some day until you scream. — 
How absurd, I won't have it, it takes two to do that. 

By the way, in the raflSe I won a vase with 2 turtle- 
doves and a bag of sweets and R. won a knife, fork 
and spoon. That annoyed him frightfully. Inspee 
won a fountain pen, just what I want, and a mirror 
which makes one look a perfect fright. A good job 
too, for she fancies herself such a lot. 

August 29th. O dear, such an awful thing has hap- 
pened. I have lost pages 30 to 34 from my diary. 
I must have left them in the garden, or else on the 
Louisenhohe. It's positively fiendish. If anyone was 
to find them. And I don't know exactly what there 
was on those pages. I was bom to ill luck. If I 
hadn't promised Hella to write my diary every day 
I should like to give up the whole thing. Fancy if 
Mother were to get hold of it, or even Father. And 
it's raining so fearfully to-day that I can't even go 
into the garden and still less on the Louisenhohe above 
all not alone. I must have lost it the day before yes- 
terday, for I didn't write anything yesterday or the 
day before. It would be dreadful if anyone were to 
find it. I am so much upset that I couldn't eat any- 
thing at dinner, although we had my favourite 
chocolate cream cake. And I'm so unhappy for Father 
was quite anxious and Mother too and they both 



FIRST YEAR 27 

asked what was the matter with me and I nearly 
burst out crying before everyone. We had dinner in 
the hotel to-day because Resi had gone away for 2 
days. But I couldn't cry in the room before Father 
and Mother for that would have given the show away. 
My only hope is that no one will recognise my writing, 
for Hella and I use upright writing for our diary, 
first of all so- that no one may recognise our writing 
and secondly because upright writing doesn't use up 
so much paper as ordinary writing. I do hope it 
will be fine to-morrow so that I can hunt in the garden 
very early. I have been utterly in the dumps all day 
so that I didn't even get cross when Inspee said: 
"Have you been quarrelling with your future hus- 
band?" 

August 30th. It's not in the garden. I begged 
Mother to let us go to Louisenhutte this afternoon. 
Mother was awfully nice and asked what I was so 
worried about, and whether anything had happened. 
Then I couldn't keep it in any longer and burst out 
crying. Mother said I must have lost something, 
and this gave me an awful fright. Mother thought 
it was Hella's letter, the one which came on Tuesday, 
so I said: No, much worse than that, my diary. 
Mother said: Oh well, that's not such a terrible loss, 
and will be of no interest to anyone. Oh yes, I said, 
for there are all sorts of things written in it about 
R. and his society. Look here, Gretel, said Mother, 
I don't like this way you talk about R. ; I really don't 
Kke you to spend all your time with the Warths; 
they're really not our sort and R. is not a fit com- 
panion for you; now that you are going to the high 
school you are not a little girl any longer. Promise 
me that youll not be eternally with the Warths. — All 
right, Mother, I will break it off gradually so that 



28 A YOUNG GIRL'S DIARY 

nobody will notice. She burst out laughing and kissed 
me on both cheeks and promised me to say nothing 
to Inspee about the diary for she needn't know every- 
thing. Mother is such a dear. Still 3 hours and 
perhaps the pages are still there. 

Evening. Thank goodness I In front of the shelter 
I found 2 pages all pulped by the rain and the writing 
all run and one page was in the footpath quite torn. 
Someone must have trodden on it with the heel of 
his boot and 2 pages had been rolled into a spill and 
partly burned. So no one had read anything. I am 
so happy. And at supper Father said: I say, why 
are your eyes shining with delight? Have you won 
the big prize in the lottery? and I pressed Mother's 
foot with mine to remind her not to give me away 
and Father laughed like anything and said: Seems 
to me there's a conspiracy against me in my own 
house. And I said in a great hurry: Luckily we're 
not in our own house but in a hotel, and everyone 
laughed and now thank goodness it's all over. Live 
and learn. I won't let that happen again. 

August 31st. Really I'm not so much with the W's 
and with R. I think he's offended. This afternoon, 
when I went there to tea, he seized me by the wrist 
and said : Your father is right, you're a witch. "You 
need a castigation." How rude of him. Besides, I 
didn't know what castigation meant. I asked Father 
and he told me and asked where I had picked up the 
word. I said I had passed 2 gentlemen and had heard 
one of them use it. What I really thought was that 
castigation meant tickling. But it is really horrid to 
have no one to talk to. Most of the people have gone 
already and we have only a week longer. About that 
castigation business. I don't like fibbing to Father, 
but I really had to. I couldn't say that R. wanted to 



FIRST YEAR 29 

give me a castigation when I didn't know what it 
meant. Dora tells a lot more lies than I do and I 
always love catching her in a lie for her lies are so 
obvious. I'm never caught. It only happened once 
when Frau Oberst von Stary was there. Father 
noticed that time^ for he said: You little rogue, you 
tarradiddlerl 

September 3rd. Such a horrid thing has happened. 
I shall never speak to R. again. Oswald is quite 
right in calling him a cad. If I had really fallen out 
of the swing I might have broken my leg 4 days before 
we have to start from home. I can't make out how 
it all happened. It was frightful cheek of him to 
tickle me as he did, and I gave him such a kick. I 
think it was on his nose or his mouth. Then he 
actually dared to say: After all I'm well paid out, 
for what can one expect when one keeps company 
with such young monkeys, with such babies. Fine 
talk from him when he's not 14 himself yet. It was 
all humbug about his being 15 and he seems to be 
one of the idlest boys in the school, never anything 
but Satisfactory in his reports, and he's not in the 
fifth yet, but only in the fourth. Anyhow, we've 
settled our accounts. Cheeky devil. I shall never 
tell anyone about it, it will be my first and I hope 
my last secret from Hella. 

September 6th. We are going home to-morrow. 
The last few days have been awfully dull. I saw 
R. once or twice but I always looked the other way. 
Father asked what was wrong between me and the 
Warths and R., so that our great friendship had been 
broken off. Of course I had to fib, for it was absolutely 
impossible to tell the truth. I said that R. found 
faiQt with everything I did, my writing, my reading 
aloud. (That's quite true, he did that once) and 



30 A YOUNG GIRL'S DIARY 

Father said: Well, well, you'll make it up when you 
say goodbye to-morrow. Father makes a great mis- 
take. I'll never speak a word to him again. 

For her birthday, although it's not come yet, Dora 
is to have a navy blue silk dustdoak. I don't think 
the colour suits her, and anyhow she's much too thin 
to wear a dustcloak. 

September 14th. Hella came back the day before 
yesterday. She looks splendid and she says I do 
too. I'm so glad that she's back. After all I told her 
about R. She was very angry and said I ought to 
have given him 2 more; one for the tickling and 
one for the "baby" and one for the "young monkey." 
If we should happen to meet him, shan't we just glare 
at him. 

September 17th. Inspee has really got the silk 
dustcloak but I think the tartan hood looks rather 
silly. Still, I didn't say so, but only that the cloak 
fitted beautifully. She has tried it on at least five 
times already. I don't know whether Father really 
wants to treat her as a grown-up lady or whether 
he is making fim of her. I believe he's only making 
fun. She doesn't really look like a grown-up lady. 
How could she when she's not 14 yet? Yesterday 
afternoon such a lot of girls were invited, and of 
course Hella was invited on my account and we had 
a grand talk. But most of them bragged frightfully 
about the country where they said they had been. We 
were 9 girls. But Hella is the only one I care about. 

September 21st. School begins to-morrow. By the 
way, we have agreed to call it Liz [Lyzeiun = High 
School] and not School. I'm frightfully curious. 

September 22nd, 19 — . School began to-day. Hella 
came to fetch me and we went along together. Inspee 
peached on us to Mother, saying we ran on in front 